---  
title: "翻訳：社長に学ぶ（1/14）"
categories:
  - Blog
---
an amateur translation of "learn from the president!" on the "almost daily itoi news" website about satoru iwata

今、「ほぼ日」の「社長に学ぶ！」シリーズを読んでいる。
本のサイトはこちら：<https://www.1101.com/president/iwata01.html>

翻訳って、難しい！でも日本語の勉強には大切だよ。ある部分は銀行の仕組みだから、グーグルの文字通り翻訳が通じない。

岩田さんと糸井さんが、英語圏に生まれたら、どんな言葉使いになるかぁ・・・とりあえず、私の英語の言葉遣いを使った・・・

read about just how insane(insanely amazing) satoru iwata is.
you'll definetly say, "ok there is literally no doubt he'd be hand-picked for the nintendo presidency"

there are some banking teminology that doesn't survive a literal translation, i've taken the liberty of using simpler words.

also, everyone's voice and choice of words is just... my own. i haven't quite decided what these folks would sound like in english.


読むシステム： How to read

> shigesato itoi's dialogue is indented like this　糸井重里の言葉はこのふうに

and satoru iwata's dialogue isn't indented　岩田聡の言葉はこのふうに


----
    part 1: having a strong vision, even when pushed to the limit
    『1』極限状態で見えてくるもの。

>
hello, iwata-san

hello.

>
look forward to working with you today.

me too.

>
so, i've known iwata-san for a while now,
this is the first time ill be "learning from the president"

it sure is. but even today, talking to itoi-san is very familiar.
we've had many conversations like this already.

>
many, many conversations.

so then renewing this kind of conversation is what we're doing
"for the first time" isnt it.

> yeah. as a matter of fact, this "lets learn from the president"
> series was originally planned because of iwata-san...
> since well, you've always managed to educate me on various things

aah, thats probably because if i find something interesting in the moment,
i think i've always spoken out about it.

if itoi-san finds something interesting, and tells people,
and their reaction you get is like "oooh!" or "wow!",
itoi-san is extremely happy to have done so right?

> mmhmm

i find the same aspect about myself too.
once i try something and understand it, if it might come in useful to itoi-san,
he'll always respond with a curious expression if it comes up in conversation

> i'm happy every time it happens. 
> i always think "aah! i see it now!!"

so, there was a time when "almost daily itoi news" was just established,
and around then, i feel i told you the most profound discovery.

> yeah, it was just around that time.

the "me" back then had no idea that he was heading to where i am today.

> yes, true.
> well, from my perspective, iwata-san was a company president from the start.
> when i first met you, you were the president of hal laboratory.
> now, a company president typically has lived a long life,
> and is a not a common individual, typically.
> but you were in your 30's when you became president, didnt you.

at the ripe age of 32 years. now because i'm 45 years old,
i've spent more than half my working life as a president huh.
but when i moved to nintendo, i wasn't immediately the company president.

> aah, there certainly was that short non-presidential period.

so, there was a 2 year blank.

> even if you had a 2 year blank of presidential activity,
> being president at all for the longest time is exceptionally rare.
> iwata-san didn't set out from the start to be a president,
> and yet you've become that very person...
> you've probably had to begin your presidency without that
> "common knowledge" amongst the other company presidents of the world right?

thats right.
if it was up to me, i'd try to make the ultimate games,
and try improve my ability to create interesting software.
that's where my heart's core passion is.

> so in hal laboratory as you became the president at the age of 32,
> with no mentor to help you, you became the president
> while the company was being left to it's own devices.

thats how hal laboratory was then.

> when i talking about those times to friends,
> everyone has that mixed wry expression as they say
> "thats something amazing..."
> and this was all from 32 huh

yep.
when i was 31, the company had a management crisis.

> there was an article in the newspaper about it
> that was laid out like a huge incident had occured:
> 「hal laboratory, a game software company,
>   upon the completion of the yamanashi office(computer village?)
>   looks to be insolvent even after acquiring new leadership」
> i remember a news report looking like that.

> when that story came out, iwata-san, were you were the section chief of technology?

the company director of development.
well, i was just responsible for the development side of things.

> then, about the director title...

i'd have to say i haven't really thought about it much.
still, it's an exaggeration.

> did you appear in company meetings?

well, those did exist.
but during then i was just speaking as the representative developer.

> "what do you think about it?"
> "if we do this, we'll be in trouble"
> it'd be nice to be able to respond like this huh

yes.

> so basically,
> you weren't necessarily thrilled to become president

yeah, i couldn't say i was thrilled at all.
the company was going bankrupt due to massive causes,
starting with our debts: they totalled around 1 billion yen.

> ow ow ow!

in the end it was 1.5 billion yen, to be repaid over 6 years.

> that would mean, 
> "repaying it all is close to impossible. but whatever we can do is better than nothing"
> was the idea then huh?

yeah.
with that, we caused lots of trouble for all kinds of people.
so it wasnt a situation where we could puff our chest and be proud.

but, there really arent many companies in the world you can peacefully
negotiate with. a company that lets you pay a tenth of the loan in twenty years
just doesn't exist in reality.
either way, we were down 1.5 billion yen. thats my start as president.
over 6 years we'll have to repay 250 million yen a year.

> and on top of that, you'll have to sort out everyones wages

of course, the company runs maintenance costs,
and we put up the land and the building as collateral,
so we could take up debts to ease other debts.

also of course, credit is due to all the cooperative allies
that the company was blessed with, without them this wouldn't be possible.
anyway, its clear that this was a disadvantaged start.

> even if the debt was just 50 million yen,
> you'd say "is that... so...".
> as an individual, we're definetly at a loss when such a large number is in front of us.

yeah. in japanese society, it's arranged so that
"when banks lend out money, managers still take individual responsibility over repaying"

while they don't demand this from presidents of massive corporations,
for small to medium sized businesses, effectively:
"once the company goes bankrupt the debt will forever be attached to the individual responsible"
this kind of promise is a custom.
well, if they didn't do that,
it'd just be too easy for bad people to just run off with the money.

so thats for the case of a limited liability company,
since because the liability is limited,
we don't want somebody who can just cut and run with the money.
and its become a common mechanism now.

so when the company puts up the building as collateral for a loan,
should the company not be able to remain profitable,
i would have to burden the responsibility of repaying that debt.
thats the kind of situation i was in.

> so i wanted to further clarify for our "almost daily itoi news" readers
> 
> * iwata-san's current explanation is fundamentally from the bank's point of view.

> when you are in debt of around 1 billion yen,
> while succeeding as management, having to explain all the rules
> at the same time is the rarest of cases.

> if this was a fictional storybook, our hero is currently facing a dire situation!
> an unbelievable amount of work lies ahead of the president!
> it'd make for a nice story to set up the bank as some kind of demon,
> "banks are always causing trouble like this!!" to make a villain for the hero is interesting,
> but in our case iwata-san wanted to logically explain why the bank operates the way it does.
> understanding the other side, so to speak.

> in this talk as well,
> it's in iwata-san's character to teach us these kinds of interesting things.

indeed.
but, even in that dire situation, i truly saw many options.
"in times like these, how should i approach the bank?"
for example, should i greet them as the new president?

> ahh, since you'd be a "youngster" president at 32, the bank teller would wonder
> "is this youngster really going to repay this loan?..."
> theres no way they wouldn't think that.

well, that 32 year old youngster decided to go and say
"as the new president, im going to work hard and repay this debt!"

when i did, with respect, they responded with
"well, do your best!"
"after all if you don't repay it... its going to be serious trouble!.."
with a oppressive demeanour.

> well whatever type of person you get, you weren't in a position to talk back

yep. well its a really interesting fact that the heavy-handed bank staff member
had to change their title afterwards.

> oh!

so from that, you can tell the other side was also facing a dire situation.

> (hahaha)
> well would you look at that! explaining the other party's perspective.
> we're not here to say "the bad guys get their just desserts"
> but instead we're thinking "life was tough for the other person, so their personality went a little off course"
> truly, this is iwata-san's character. ahh.

> * whatever happens to people, black and white, good and evil, red and white,
> in stories we tend to attribute polarising characteristics to people.
> when you watch a drama, you can tell "ahhh this is the bad person"
> or "ahh this is the character that everyone can relate to"

> but iwata-san thinks "everyone involved is just a regular ol' human, making their way in this world".
> the way he acknowledges people as people is absolute. it will never change.


    end of part 1