---
layout: post
title: 8. tutor responsibilities
date: 2018-03-02 11:06
author: iuyhcdfs
comments: true
categories: [Uncategorized]
---
<p style="text-align:center;"><strong>I'll talk about being a tutor, <em>but actually I'm talking about game</em> <em>tutorials.</em></strong></p>
<p style="text-align:center;">You can guide a student to improve their skills and be able to approach tasks without ever thinking of giving up. Games need to do that too.</p>

<h3><strong>the student/player analogy</strong></h3>
It was like this when a <a href="https://iuondesign.wordpress.com/2018/02/20/5-a-very-nintendo-chinese-new-year/" target="_blank" rel="noopener">10 year old cousin played videogames:</a> the main observation with new players is that, these controllers might not make sense.

The goal of the game might not be apparent either. Games might actually be too complex for some players.
<p style="text-align:center;"><em>And that's okay, as long as the player is not discouraged from learning a complex game.</em></p>
Now, you should already be aware of obvious game tutorials and game levels that also act as tutorials. We're not going to comment on which one is nicer or neater.

The more important thing is boiling down the actual essences behind what could make a player give up on a game. Then, dealing with them. <em>You'll have to figure this out during a few playtests, but while designing a level you should notice where tension can be.</em>
<p style="text-align:center;"><em>There's no point designing cool emergent gameplay if your audience gives up.</em></p>
Similarly a student could get discouraged in education. But for a subject, lets suppose it's mathematics, the reasons why a student gets discouraged and the actions they can take vary. A tutor can help a student get back on track if they get lost.

Since <em>anything is possible in games</em>, the game you make can also act as the tutor. Tutorial levels do not have the same responsibilities as an actual tutor, so we'll get into that.<!--more-->

&nbsp;
<h3><strong>self awareness</strong></h3>
If you're playing to unwind after a day of work: <em>You're not observing how you play a game</em>. <em>You just don't want to think too hard, and that's okay!</em>

The issue of this is if you're up against a new game. You might develop bad habits or not use the controls effectively. And that can shut down the enjoyment.

Some games don't have this problem because they have multiple playstyles which the player can choose (and disregard efficency of if they so please).

Some games however include levels which might need to be reset if done too inefficently, or require the right execution of button presses to clear. These games that require more presence of mind then become an issue.
<h3><strong>pathways of thought</strong></h3>
<h3><strong>progress</strong></h3>
<h3><strong>motivations</strong></h3>
