---
layout: page
title: g1. fjordboard's design/plan
date: 2018-03-10 13:51
author: iuyhcdfs
comments: true
categories: []
---
Design/planning for fjordboard, a snowboarding gameplay prototype.

Needed to practice hammering out details to make development less confusing, and if I needed to work with a team someday.
<p style="text-align:center;">If I were to quickly pitch this game, it'd be</p>

<h4 style="text-align:center;"><em><strong>"A Snowboarding Game That's So Good,
</strong></em><em><strong>You Could Even Play It With Your Nose"</strong></em></h4>
<h3><strong>the goals</strong></h3>
A cousin couldn't play snowboard kids/ 1080 snowboarding because the N64 analog stick was too hard to use. I wanted to make a touch screen version that's simple.

Apart from "get faster at prototyping" there are 3 unique goals for this game:
<ol>
	<li>Create a game that "looks" complete</li>
	<li>Put the game onto the store</li>
	<li>Have gameplay that satisfies my original motivation</li>
</ol>
<h3><strong>the tasks</strong></h3>
I now have a variety of challenges to accomplish:
<ol>
	<li>Learning how to build in unity
<ul>
	<li>a. Dealing with Nuances</li>
	<li>b. Dealing with Gameplay</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>To simply demonstrate satisfying snowboard mechanics, an infinite runner environment is ideal.
<ul>
	<li>a. Obstacles worth steering around is necessary.</li>
	<li>b. There are options for obstacle interaction and increasing difficulty.</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>To create a game that "looks" complete, menu systems must be learnt. This will also help the game get onto the store
<ul>
	<li>a. UI creation is necessary.</li>
	<li>b. The game shouldn't crash or get into an unplayable state. All situations need to be handled gracefully</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ol>
<h3><strong>1a. dealing with unity's nuances</strong></h3>
learning how to deal with garbage collection,
how to do efficient mathematical calculations.
How to save high scores locally should be researched.
How lighting works
Game objects and scripting
Exporting
<h3><strong>1b. making gameplay in unity</strong></h3>
The game will be on a flat slope but appear to be slanted due to the camera angle.

For this, normal gravity cannot be used. It is at the wrong angle. The benefit is that shifting the world back to origin is cleaner.
Maybe this isn't a huge issue in the long run, but it's the decision I've made.

You are being pulled to the ground + the direction you initially face at the start of the game.

Most of the basic scripting can take care of this.
<h3><strong>2a. the core steering mechanic</strong></h3>
The design is rather simple. Either side of the screen will steer the snowboard. Pictures aren't needed.

More maths is required to make smoother turning. Since the location the screen is pressed does not change the intensity of your turn...
Turning needs to become stronger, the longer the button is held. There may be around 2-10 frames of slow steering before rapid steering occurs.
If the period of slow steering is too long, players can't comfortable dodge trees on reaction and the gameplay suffers.

Steering will introduce some leaning rotation to the player. This allows the player to balance themselves by steering.
The rotation could potentially act as an exceedable cap for how much the player can turn
(turning too much results in falling over, but it is not prohibited)

The player model will slowly, and automatically, try to straighten itself out.

Steering changes your angle relative to the game world, if you surf perpendicular to the slope, you will be pushed to rotate towards the direction of the slope.
The leaning rotation may depend on the players orientation. As you return to face the slope direction, your board may naturally try to straighten out.
With this, the player is not heavily punished for a sharper steering angle. This is necessary since we don't have an analog stick to have escaped this situation via finesse.
<h3><strong>2b. additional mechanics</strong></h3>
Scoring: To achieve the greatest velocity. If it was distance, you can just lightly bump trees on the way down constantly.

Obstacles will include varying elevation and trees. Collision will utilise a physics engine.

The game is lost due to potential losing conditions. I have to choose to have or not have these lose conditions:
<ul>
	<li>Hard enough collisions (board stops abruptly) will count as a loss (and player gets dislodged from the board)</li>
	<li>Player model (some human) hits something that isnt the snowboard</li>
</ul>
Trying to make the highest velocity seems more comfortable. You can hang around in the map without dying, and then have a shot at it.

In this sense, a player should be able to mount bumps in terrain at high speed without losing the game due to the collision
(we're going to have shitty triangular prism ramps in the prototype)
For a collision loss, a SUITABLY LARGE AMOUNT of speed loss must occur.

NEEDS PLAYTESTING:
Once the speed loss limit to lose the game is sufficently high, early moments of the game (which are low in speed)
are now slow enough that the player won't lose from a collision. Does this teach the wrong lesson?
<h3><strong>3a+b. game states and menus</strong></h3>
<ul>
	<li>Menu
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; Start game</li>
	<li>-&gt; Choose turning weight/accel</li>
	<li>-&gt; link to website</li>
	<li>-&gt; some kind of title</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>Start game
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; gameplay
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; Lose game</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>Lose game
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; lose prompt</li>
	<li>-&gt; play again?
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; Menu</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>-&gt; i don't have a donate button but i do have a non compulsory watch ad for charity button here</li>
</ul>
</li>
	<li>Choose turning
<ul>
	<li>-&gt; change turning sensitivity (around y axis)</li>
	<li>-&gt; change leaning (around player's relative z axis)</li>
	<li>-&gt; default (optimal choice but why not let the player have fun)</li>
	<li>-&gt; return to Menu</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
